Color of Change Context

OUR MISSION
Color Of Change is the nation’s largest online racial justice organization.

We help people respond effectively to injustice in the world around us. As a national online force driven by 7 million members, we move decision-makers in corporations and government to create a more human and less hostile world for Black people in America.

Our campaigns and initiatives win changes that matter. By designing strategies powerful enough to fight racism and injustice—in politics and culture, in the work place and the economy, in criminal justice and community life, and wherever they exist—we are changing both the written and unwritten rules of society. We mobilize our members to end practices and systems that unfairly hold Black people back, and champion solutions that move us all forward.

Look at what we won in 2024 with your help. See how we're building Black power, Black joy, and winning justice.

Our Work
Color of Change leads campaigns that build real power for Black communities. We challenge injustice, hold corporate and political leaders accountable, commission game-changing research on systems of inequality, and advance solutions for racial justice that can transform our world.


Criminal
Justice
Holding Prosecutors Accountable and Accelerating Prosecutor Reform
 Ending Money Bail
 Ending Profit Incentives Fueling Mass incarceration
 Decriminalizing poverty and stopping unnecessary prosecutions
 Implementing fair sentencing laws and sentence reductions
 Stopping prison expansion and prison labor exploitation
 Stopping anti-Black violence and vigilantes


 Culture Change
& Media Justice
 Ensuring accurate and diverse representations of Black people in media
 Ending inaccurate and racially-biased local news reporting
 Achieving meaningful diversity and inclusion behind the scenes in Hollywood
 Ending inaccurate representations of the criminal justice system on TV

 Voting Freedom
& Democracy
 Expanding voter access and ensuring the votes of all Black people count
 Ending voter intimidation and voter suppression policies, including voter ID laws
 Boosting civic engagement before and after elections
 Ensuring full and fair representation in the 2020 census

 Tech
Justice
 Protecting net neutrality
 Stopping government surveillance of Black activists
 Achieving meaningful diversity and inclusion behind the scenes in Silicon Valley
 Ending unjust practices, racially-biased policies and inaccurate content on social media platforms


 Right Wing Politics
& White Nationalism
Challenging racist and anti-progressive Trump Administration and state policies
 Dismantling right-wing and white nationalist infrastructure/support
 Targeting corporate enablers of anti-Black policies and culture


Economic
Justice
Ensuring equitable treatment for Black employees in the marketplace
 Stopping predatory lending and other predatory corporate practices
 Building momentum for progressive tax, labor and education policies



Economic Justice
Criminal Justice
Media Justice
Power & Voice

 RACIAL JUSTICE: AN INTEGRATED APPROACH
The forces that shape our lives are interrelated. We cannot end racism in one area without tackling it in all areas. Racist policing is propped up by racist media narratives on crime and justice. Political inequality is reinforced by economic inequality. Unlivable wages and unfair hiring practices make it easier for corporations to continue to exploit Black workers and consumers.

We design winning strategies to change the written and unwritten rules in the industries that affect Black people’s lives the most and have the greatest potential to advance racial justice.


Color Of Change is building a new, effective strategy for changing the rules society lives by, and ending the injustices Black people face.



Strategic Initiatives

Winning Justice
About the Movement
Our movement is winning.
Every time we hold prosecutors accountable, we are transforming our criminal justice system and building power for our communities. 
The prosecutor accountability movement has developed a winning approach to ending the most unjust, unconstitutional, destructive and racist practices of prosecutors: money bail, over-charging, over-sentencing, over-policing, the drug war, attacking immigrants, sending our kids to adult prisons and keeping secrets about what’s really happening in their offices and in police departments. 

We are making real change.
Our criminal justice system is racist, violent and deeply unjust. It targets the people we love and the communities we live in. Its injustices makes us feel pain, anger and outrage. All the time. 

We see Black, Brown and Native people brutalized and murdered by police. We see jails and prisons steal the future of the people we love. We see corporations drain our families of their wealth and resources. 

We also see our community’s capacity for love, joy and power. We have realized that if we get organized and mobilized—and trust one another—we can end mass incarceration and police violence and take control of our communities. It begins with prosecutors, the single most influential people in the system.

We are demanding that prosecutors across the country change their policies and practices. And we're winning. 

Our 6 Demands
IMPLEMENT PRETRIAL REFORMS 
Increase eligibility for mandatory and presumptive prebooking release without conditions, end the use of money bail for all offenses, and expand recommendations to release people on their own recognizance with the least restrictive conditions. 
Prosecutors must implement reforms related to pretrial incarceration in order to address devastating issues like overcrowding in jails, incarceration due solely to an inability to pay money bail and the life-altering collateral consequences of pretrial detention. Reforms should include: 1. creating a wider net of people eligible for mandatory and presumptive prebooking release without conditions; 2. expanding recommendations to release people on their own recognizance (ROR) or with the least restrictive conditions to their freedom; and 3. ending the use of money bail for all offenses. On any given day, more than 83% of people incarcerated in U.S. jails have not been convicted of their alleged crime. More than 60% are in jail simply because they cannot afford bail. The money bail system criminalizes poverty, contributes to and augments racial bias in the criminal legal system and has dire consequences for those entrapped in the system and for their communities. By making conditions of release contingent upon an ability to pay, money bail creates a system of wealth-based detention.

Even if someone is never convicted of an alleged crime, pretrial incarceration — being removed from one's life and community for months or years — often has disastrous effects on the accused, their loved ones and, by extension, their community. Pretrial detention can result in swift loss of employment and income, destabilization of housing, family separation and family trauma. Research has further confirmed that cash bail or supervision does not increase the likelihood an accused person will appear in court or deter possible recidivism.

TREAT KIDS LIKE KIDS
Do not prosecute people under age 18 in adult court.
An estimated 76,000 children are prosecuted, sentenced, or incarcerated as adults annually. Each time a prosecutor charges a child as an adult, or opposes transferring a child’s case back to juvenile court, prosecutors fail not only the child, but entire communities by undermining public safety and creating barriers to rehabilitation. Children in adult jails are more likely to suffer permanent trauma and are five times more likely to die by suicide than children held in juvenile detention centers. Incarcerating children with adults also deprives them of access to essential programs and services that are fundamental to successful re-entry into their communities, including but not limited to education instruction, health care and counseling services. Youth in the adult criminal legal system also face a higher risk of sexual abuse, physical abuse and solitary confinement. 

Black communities disproportionately feel the consequences of charging children as adults. Black children are three times more likely to be referred to court compared to white children. In 2018, Black youths represented less than 15% of the total youth population, but 52% of youth prosecuted in adult criminal court. Black youths are nine times more likely than white youths to receive an adult prison sentence.

STOP LOW-LEVEL PROSECUTIONS
Decline to prosecute low-level offenses such as those that criminalize poverty, including homelessness, sex work (purchase and sale), drug possession and so-called “nuisance” crimes; decline to prosecute “resisting arrest” charges; limit the use of bench warrants for failure to appear. Decline to prosecute abortion and other pregnancy outcomes. Decline to prosecute pregnant people for actions during pregnancy where the fetus, embryo or fertilized egg is impacted.
Black people have been over-policed for generations, leading to gross disparities in arrests and incarceration rates. 

Data continually shows that enforcement of low-level offenses such as drug possession offenses, sex work and other “quality of life” offenses do not increase public safety. In fact, the disparate and over-enforcement of these low-level law violations devastate under-resourced individuals and communities. Jurisdictions where lawmakers or prosecutors have ceased to prosecute people for drug possession, sex work and/or other low-level offenses have not experienced negative public health or safety consequences. For example, in Baltimore, declination policies have led to fewer new low-level drug and prostitution arrests, almost no re-arrests for serious crimes for those whose charges were dropped and fewer 911 calls. A study of Boston DA Rachael Rollins’ policies showed that not prosecuting misdemeanors led to reductions in arrests for felonies.

Additionally, sweeping attempts to criminalize pregnancy and pregnancy outcomes and to restrict access to reproductive care threatens the well-being of communities and erodes trust in the legal system. Prosecutors, however, have the discretion to not criminalize deeply personal decisions and ensure the safety of patients and providers in these cases. By instituting a declination policy, prosecutors can ensure that child-bearing people will not be prosecuted for their pregnancy outcomes and that feticide laws will not be used as a proxy for punishing pregnancy loss. 

END THE SECRECY
Increase transparency within local prosecutors’ offices by publishing guidelines on charging decisions, engaging regularly and intentionally with community-based organizations to share data and hear recommendations and collecting and publicly releasing criminal justice data. 
Prosecutors must make every effort to increase office transparency by publishing guidelines on charging decisions and engaging regularly and intentionally with community-based organizations to share data and concerns and to hear recommendations. Prosecutors also must increase transparency by collecting and regularly making public criminal justice data, including but not limited to data on pretrial decisions, court cases, sentences and demographics, as well as data on diversions, misdemeanors, juvenile prosecutions and sentencing recommendations and outcomes for adult felony cases broken down by offense type and  race/ethnicity/gender/indigency status of people charged. 

Additionally, the office should hold regular trainings on bias, racism and racial equity. Prosecutors must engage in expectation setting with staff, prioritizing evidence-based solutions and reforms that actually promote public safety and health over a commitment to filling cages. 

AVOID IMMIGRATION CONSEQUENCES
Ensure protections for non-citizens by declining to cooperate with U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, or ICE, and by training line prosecutors on handling cases with potential immigration consequences and instituting an office-wide policy to consider immigration circumstances and avoid negative immigration consequences in cases where relevant. 
Prosecutors play an essential role in ensuring immigration protections and keeping families together. Although federal immigration laws allow non-citizens to be subject to deportation for low-level, non-violent offenses such as traffic violations and theft, non-citizens should not be targeted and used to drive up conviction rates. Targeting immigrants for low-level offenses routinely leads to unnecessary and unjust deportations. These practices undermine public safety because the threat of harsh collateral consequences also can deter people from cooperation and seeking resources from prosecutors' offices.

Prosecutors must hire special immigration counsel to train line prosecutors on handling cases with potential immigration consequences. Prosecutors also must make clear to line prosecutors and defense counsel their prevailing office policy of considering immigration circumstances and avoiding negative immigration consequences for people where relevant. Prosecutors also must adopt a policy of declining to cooperate with ICE and the U.S. Department of Homeland Security to identify people who may be subject to deportation.

HOLD POLICE ACCOUNTABLE
Increase transparency and accountability by establishing a separate division, walled off from the rest of the prosecutor’s office, to investigate and prosecute cases against police officers alleged to have committed crimes while on duty. This office should report only to the elected prosecutor.
The working relationships between prosecutors and police officers can complicate the pursuit of justice, including when officers are alleged to have engaged in misconduct. Prosecutors must display neutrality and maintain the integrity of the office when working with police officers. In doing so, prosecutors must decline to accept political contributions or endorsements from police unions or foundations.

Prosecutors should work to curb the disparate impact of over-policing. Pretextual stops have contributed to countless police killings, such as those of Tyre Nichols in Memphis in January 2023 and Philando Castile in July 2016 in Minnesota. This change will require prosecutors to implement policies categorically declining and making clear which offenses will not result in charges. As such, prosecutors must comply and affirmatively enforce existing laws to decline to prosecute charges resulting from pretextual non-public safety stops, including minor traffic offenses; develop and publish a Brady/Giglio list of non-credible law enforcement officers whose testimonies prosecutors will not seek nor use in court; actively seek and obtain police misconduct records and share them with the defense as part of discovery; and publish “decline to prosecute” decisions on use-of-force cases involving police officers.


District Attorney Coalitions
Share Share on Facebook Share on Twitter
Prosecutors are the most powerful single actors in the criminal justice system. Now more than ever, it’s critical we are engaged and ready to take action to hold them accountable. 

Color Of Change works with people in local communities in cities and towns across the nation who are actively challenging prosecutorial practices. Here are the platforms and demands of communities that are working to hold their newly elected prosecutors accountable. 

Alameda County District Attorney Accountability Table
Website
Social Media
Since the inception of their role in the American criminal legal system, prosecutors have mirrored, reproduced, and expanded a system of justice rooted in white supremacy and the criminalization of poverty. 

Today, this manifests all too clearly in routine patterns of systemic racism through disparate charges and sentences for Black & Brown people. It is time for a new vision of criminal justice.

Stories of Impact
Share Share on Facebook Share on Twitter
We are turning stories of pain into stories of power.
These are just a few stories about people like you. They are people who stepped up. Now, they are leading major change in the criminal justice system across the country. These community leaders are channeling their pain, disappointment and outrage into something tangible—the prosecutor accountability movement. Read these stories to learn about their successes.  

Movement Impact


New York, New York

In November 2022, Color Of Change, in partnership with Survived and Punished NY, successfully pressured Manhattan District Attorney Alvin Bragg to drop the charges against Tracy McCarter.


Atlanta, Georgia

In 2023, Color of Change successfully pressured District Attorney Fani Willis to reduce the Fulton County Jail population.


St. Louis, Missouri

In 2018, organizers for prosecutor accountability achieved an incredible win that would not only change the course of St. Louis County history but also alter the landscape of criminal justice throughout the county for years to come.


San Francisco, California

In 2019, Chesa Boudin swept the race for San Francisco District Attorney after campaigning on a platform of reform and decarceration.


Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

After Philadelphians elected District Attorney Larry Krasner to be their new district attorney in 2016, communities wanted to make sure their high hopes for his tenure would not be wasted, leading to the disappointment they had faced with so many others. Soon after Krasner’s election, the local coalition held a rally outside his office to demand that he implement an aggressive reform agenda within his first 100 days.


Dallas, Texas

Activists in Dallas recently exposed their prosecutor, Faith Johnson, for taking money from the for-profit bail industry. Now, communities are demanding that she return her corporate money, take the side of the people—not profits—and use the power of her office to finally end money bail.


Chicago, Illinois

In 2016, the people of Chicago united to hold State’s Attorney Anita Alvarez accountable. The new prosecutor, Kim Foxx, vowed reform. The people are making sure she follows through. In a city like Chicago, with a police force that has killed more Black people than almost any other police department, it is critical for community members to help ensure Foxx will deliver on the promises she has made.


Orlando, Florida

In 2016, running on a reform platform, Aramis Ayala become the first Black State’s Attorney in Florida, and the first woman to hold that position in Florida’s ninth circuit court district, which includes Orlando.


Greenville, North Carolina

Organizers and community members created a public outcry against their prosecutor, Kimberly Robb, as part of a strategy to win the release of Dontae Sharpe, who has been falsely convicted of murder.


New York, New York

Activists recently forced both Manhattan and Brooklyn prosecutors, Cyrus Vance and Eric Gonzalez, to announce in January, 2018 that they would be ending the use of money bail for most misdemeanors, including jumping subway turnstile and minor drug possession.

Roadmap for Reform Prosecutors
Share Share on Facebook Share on Twitter
Download 
Roadmap for Reform Prosecutors

Through changes in official policy directives and practices, prosecutors can make the communities they serve safer, without causing harm or relying on incarceration and other forms of punitive sanctions as the only forms of justice.

Prosecutors play a critical role at every stage of the criminal process, from initial charging decisions to post-conviction sentencing. Every day, prosecutors utilize broad discretion to decide who to charge with what offense as well as recommending the severity of the punishment for the alleged violation. For decades, overzealous prosecution has fueled mass incarceration and the overcriminalization of Black communities and other communities of color.

Today, a new approach is needed to reverse these trends while building meaningful public safety. Through changes in official policy directives and practices, prosecutors can make the communities they serve safer, without causing harm or relying on incarceration and other forms of punitive sanctions as the only forms of justice.

Based on pragmatic and achievable goals, the Roadmap for Reform Prosecutors provides prosecutors across the country with evidence-based recommendations for employing the tools at their disposal to improve prosecutorial outcomes. Some of the practices below are already a legal requirement of prosecutors, but may require additional action to address current failures in implementation and to ensure compliance. Other recommendations encourage community and agency partnerships to increase transparency, accountability and advance reform-minded policies. Together, these recommendations, supported by extensive quantitative research, are necessary to ensure prosecutors promote fair and equal treatment throughout the criminal legal process.

We must also acknowledge that in the years since the rise of the reform prosecutors movement, several reformers have come under attack from right-wing conservatives, and some have been removed from office. We will not give up. We will stand up and fight back.

The Roadmap for Reform Prosecutors mirrors the flow of the criminal legal system and provides specific recommendations for prosecutors to follow at each stage of decision making.



Key aspects of Color of Change:
Mission: To help people respond effectively to injustice and create a more human and less hostile world for Black people in America. 
Membership: Driven by a large online membership of over 7 million people. 
Focus Areas:
Criminal Justice Reform: Advocating for policies and practices to end mass incarceration, police violence, and other injustices within the criminal justice system.
Media and Culture Change: Challenging harmful media narratives and working to change the representation of Black people across various platforms.
Voting Rights and Democracy: Working to expand voter access and ensure fair representation for Black communities in elections and the census.
Economic Justice: Addressing issues of economic inequality and promoting policies that support economic opportunity for Black communities.
Tech Justice: Advocating for equitable access to technology and addressing issues like online discrimination and surveillance targeting Black communities. 
Approach: Uses online platforms and grassroots organizing to mobilize members and influence decision-makers in corporations and government. 
Impact: Has led successful campaigns to address systemic racism and discrimination, influence policy changes, and promote accountability. 
Examples of Color of Change's work and impact:
Successfully pressured Fox News to fire Glenn Beck and Bill O'Reilly.
Forced corporations to withdraw support for the American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC), a group promoting policies that harm communities of color.
Pushed for reform-minded prosecutors who prioritize community safety over corporate profits.
Launched campaigns to end money bail and other practices that contribute to mass incarceration.
Exposed and challenged inaccurate and harmful representations of Black people in the media. 
Note: While Color of Change has achieved significant victories and recognition, it has also faced internal challenges, including allegations of union-busting and toxic work environments. 
